A device adapter is a C++ class for controlling one specific device, e.g. stage, camera, shutter, etc. Each device adapter must implement one of the abstract interfaces defined in the MMDevice.h. Device Library (dynamic library) can contain one or more device adapters. The Library module must also implement plug-in API defined in the ModuleInterface.h in order to be loaded by Micro-manager applications. In theory, these two files plus MMDeviceConstants.h (for error codes and other constants) are all we need to create device adapters: if you implement the required API with the correct behavior, the Micro-Manager application will be able to make use of it.

MMDevice.h, ModuleInterface.h and MMDeviceConstants.h essentially define the plug-in interface and are also used by the Micro-manager application. We should never modify these files – any discrepancy between your version and the one used to build the main application will likely result in the system crash or severe malfunction
Utility classes and files

To make building device adapters easier, we provide a couple of additional files to use as building blocks. First, DeviceBase.h contains base class partial API implementations for all device classes. The idea is to derive our particular device adapter class from the appropriate class defined in the DeviceBase.h. This header file contains method implementations as well, so there is no corresponding cpp file.

Since DeviceBase.h and other utility files are not used by the main application, you can modify them if you wish. However, the best strategy is to avoid changing any of the supplied utility files since they implement some of the essential device behavior that the main application is relying on.

Property.h and Property.cpp provide the implementation of the Micro-Manager “Property” mechanism, but again, only on the device side – they are not used in the rest of the application. Property class is used by the DeviceBase.h classes and most of the time you won’t have to deal with it directly.

DeviceUtils.h and DeviceUtils.cpp contain a couple of relatively simple helper functions we may or may not want to use.

ImgBuffer.h and ImgBuffer.cpp provide a simple implementation of the generic image buffer, which you may or may not find useful for building camera adapters. We can disregard this class if we have a better one or if our device does not need to deal with images.
Anatomy of a Device Adapter

This section outlines guidelines for designing a well-behaved Device Adapter. The MMCamera project included in the TestDeviceAdapters directory is a very simple example that can be used to follow the outline.
Constructor and destructor

Besides ensuring that all member variables get initialized in the constructor and all resources released in destructor, there are a couple of important guidelines to follow with respect to Micro-manager run time environment.

The first rule is that we should not communicate with the hardware either in the constructor nor destructor. Connection to the hardware should be established in the Initialize() method and terminated in Shutdown(). The constructor and destructor should be designed in such way that creating and destroying an instance of the Device Adapter class (without initializing) carries low overhead and that create/destroy sequence can be repeated multiple times without any effect on the hardware.

The second rule is to use the constructor to create and set any device properties that are independent of hardware, such as description strings, adapter name, etc. The concept of properties is explained in detail in the Properties section below.

The third rule is to use the constructor to create properties that are required for proper initialization of the hardware. The best example for this is the serial port property. In order to communicate with the hardware, the device adapter needs to know the serial port (COM port) name that device is attached to. When implementing the Initialize() method that establishes the initial communication with the hardware, we already must know the serial port name. Therefore, this property and its value assignment must be set before the Initialize() method is called. Such properties that are required to have their values determined before initialization are called “pre-initialization” properties.
Initialize() and Shutdown() methods

The Initialize() and Shudown() methods are critical to ensure that Device Adapter behaves as expected within Micro-manager environment. Rules for implementing these two methods are as follows:

    The Device Adapter instance does not communicate with hardware before Initialize() is called for the first time.
    Initialize() establishes the connection with the hardware and makes device ready to accept commands
    Once the device is successfully initialized, repeated calls to Initialize() (if they occur) should have no effect
    Shutdown() disconnects Device Adapter from the hardware and practically reverses the effect of Initialize()
    Once the device is successfully shut down, repeated calls to Shutdown() should not have any effect
    After Shutdown() is called device should never attempt to communicate with the hardware, except after Inititalize() is called again
    Calling Shutdown() without a previous Initialize() should have no effect.

Device Types, Names and Labels

Device Type is defined by one of the abstract classes contained in MMDevice.h. Each abstract device class implements an API corresponding to various physical hardware devices, e.g. filter wheels, stages, shutters, cameras, etc. We should pick a device type class that is a best match for our hardware device. Sometimes we have to use multiple device types for the same hardware unit, e.g. motorized microscope. In that case we would provide multiple Device Adapter classes that are at run-time connected to the same controller (or Hub) device.

Device Name within Micro-manager should be understood as something akin to a class name in C++. It does not have to be the same as the actual class name, but for all practical purposes it serves as such. It has to be unique within one Library. Micro-manager run-time environment creates instances of Device Adapters by providing the Device Name to the Library which acts as a class factory. The Library looks up the name, instantiates the corresponding C++ class and returns the pointer to the Device Adapter instance.

Device labels are run-time names assigned by the application to each instance, regardless of the actual Device Adapter class. Labels are used as handles for accessing any Device Adapter instance. Typically users assign labels to instances of their devices and the only rule is that they must be unique for each device. So if we equate Device Name as an equivalent of a “class”, a Label would be equivalent to “pointer”.
Properties

The Property mechanism allows the developer to customize settings and behavior of each new Device Adapter. While MM::Device API represents minimal functionality for each device type, is specified in advance and must be implemented by each Device Adapter class, properties are not prescribed and we can have as many or as few as we deem appropriate for controlling our hardware.

Each Device Adapter class can have zero or more properties. Each property is a simple name-value pair. At run time the application assigns values to properties in one of the three ways: in the configuration process, interactively through the GUI, or by running
Instance management

Micro-manager API in principle allows for multiple instances of the same Device Adapter, i.e. there may be multiple objects carrying the same Device Name. However, depending on the particular device and implementation, multiple instances of the same Device Adapter may or may not make sense. It is the responsibility of the library to either manage instances and any global data that may be shared between them.

Often in case of implementing a Library with multiple devices that are practically identical, we are faced with a design decision regarding instance management. How are we going to distinguish instances within our library since each class instance actually corresponds to a very specific physical hardware device?
Multiple independent devices

The simplest case is if we just have multiple identical devices all independently attached to the host computer. For example we have one or more filter changers each attached to a separate COM port. We create a single class “MyFilterChanger” derived from the StateDeviceBase class and provide a property called “Port” which should be set at the actual port device is attached to. At run-time Micro-manager application can create any number of instances of the MyFilterChanger class and everything work fine as long each one is assigned a different COM port.
Multiple devices sharing the same controller

More complicated example would be a controller box with two filter changers, say A and B. The controller is attached to a single COM port and each command in the command set has a variable that can be either “A” or “B” depending on which filter changer we want to move. The most straightforward way would be to implement “MyController” class with “Port” property and have that adapter communicate with the hardware box. MyController is obviously not a filter changer but rather a generic device used to communicate with a host computer. For

Now we can add two filter changer devices with distinct device names “MyFilterA” and “MyFilterB”. The library will now contain three Device Adapters: MyController, MyFilterA and MyFilterB. Since the last two are virtually identical except for using a different variable (“A” or “B”) when talking to the controller, internally we can use the same class to implement both of them. Deciding whether instance of that class will act as device A or device B can be easily accomplished by passing an appropriate parameter in the constructor.

Micro-manager supports the concept of the “parent” device (Hub) which exactly fits the description of the MyController. Designing and implementing multi-device libraries with Hub controller is described at lenngth in section Complex device management: writing Hub adapters.
Application Layer Services (Core Callbacks)

Device Adapter classes are typically derived from appropriate base classes which provide default behavior and various utility methods. But besides base-class inherited methods, Device Adapters also use functionality provided by the parent application. We refer to these application layer services as “callbacks”. The API for callback methods is defined in MMDevice.h in the abstract class MM::Core. At-run time each Device Adapter can obtain a pointer to the instance of the MM::Core interface and use any of the methods provided by it.
Threads

A minimal, cross-platform set of thread management utilities is provided in MMThreads.h to make Device Adapter implementation easier. Any other thread management library can be used instead. For devices that can in principle run on different operating systems we recommend avoiding native, platform specific thread functions.